---
title: "A Composable (params/JSON) Decoder Library for Ruby"
---

TODO: I use "a bunch" a lot...
TODO: Check for TODOs

[Show me the code!](https://github.com/timhabermaas/timhabermaas.github.io/blob/develop/code/decoder.rb)

In this blog post I want to build a highly composable and extensible library for decoding Ruby values into user defined data types. This library can be used as a replacement for [strong_parameters](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/action_controller_overview.html#strong-parameters) or as the necessary data wrangling step after `JSON.parse`, `CSV.parse`, etc.


The values returned from Ruby's `JSON.parse` and `CSV.parse`, Rails'
`params` and savon's SOAP responses all have one thing in common: They consist solely of some combination of these types:

* `Integer`
* `Float`
* `String`
* `TrueClass`/`FalseClass`
* `Hash`
* `Array`

This might not seem like such a big deal, but being able to handle all return
values identically makes it possible to write one generic decoder library
which handles several use cases at once.

## What is a decoder?

Depending on context _decoder_ has multiple meanings. For the purpose of this
blog post (and the library we're building) I have the following hand-wavy
definition in mind:

> A decoder is a partial function which converts one object (graph) into another object (graph).

_Object graph_ refers to one specific Ruby object in memory and _partial_
simply means that a decoder might not necessarily succeed (think trying to
convert `"a"` to an integer).

So, a decoder would for example take an array with two elements and turn it
into a hash map with two keys: `[2, 3]` -> `{x: 2, y: 3}`

#### Coercer, Decoder, Serializer? 🤔

^[TODO: Remove this paragraph? What's the purpose?]
There seems to be some overlap between the terms _decoder_, _coercer_ and _serializer_.

* _serializer_: Mostly concerned with stuff being sent over the wire, close to
  parsing; operates on strings or bytes.
* _coercer_: Concerned with [type
  converting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_conversion) of a single value,
  not for an entire object graph.
* _decoder_: Concerned with converting things from one representation to
  another, usually in-memory.

## Why do I need a decoder?

It's very likely that you're already doing some conversion in your
application/library. So, the question becomes: Do you need to write an
explicit decoder or can you get by with some ad-hoc `Array#map`, `Date.parse`
and `Hash#[]` calls?

Technically you don't[^type-system], but for larger applications it becomes
very useful to convert values received at the boundaries of your system
(HTTP, file system, database, ...) to values the rest of your program can
work with. Sprinkling a bunch of `Date.parse` throughout your app gets
tiresome fast. Some examples for when you might want to use an explicit
decoder:

* converting String values (`"2018-10-02"`, `"true"`, `"42"`) to the proper types (`Date`, `TrueClass`, `Integer`)
* interpreting `nil`s correctly (sometimes they mean the absence of values, sometimes they mean infinity)
* dealing with badly designed APIs (the date `"2999-12-31"` might mean "no deadline" [^deadline])

## Design goals & existing approaches

We strive for the following properties:

* _Composibility_: Decoders should be values so they can be passed to function
  and composed in arbitrary ways.
* _Flexibility_: It should be easy to express more or less arbitrary decodings.
* _Extensibility_: It should be easy for users of the library to define their
  own decoders---preferably by simply combining the provided building blocks.

Most existing libraries which provide some kind of input coercion, decoding
or validation take a DSL and/or configuration heavy approach.
[^existing-libraries] This makes it difficult to reuse or build abstractions
on top of decoders without extending the DSL itself.
It's also common for existing libraries to either tie the decoding to a
specific class---meaning there has to be a 1-to-1 relationship between
possible decodings and how the class can be constructed---or only return a
hash map as a result---meaning there has to be a 1-to-1 relationship between
input hash keys and output hash keys.

## Running example

Let's assume we're tasked to decode the following hash maps to their
respective Ruby representations (see end of code listing). We'll use this
concrete example as a guide throughout this post.


```ruby
# p1 and p2 are two possible shapes for the same form params
p1 = {
  "type" => "circle",
  "center" => {
    "x" => "10",
    "y" => "12"
  },
  "radius" => "4",
  "color" => "red",
  "status" => "visible"
}

p2 = {
  "type" => "rectangle",
  "topLeft" => {
    "x" => "0",
    "y" => "3"
  },
  "width" => "4",
  "height" => "5",
  "color" => "blue",
  "status" => "invisible"
}

def decoder
  # TODO
end

decoder.run(p1) # => Circle.new(Point.new(10, 12), 4, "RED", true)
decoder.run(p2) # => Rectangle.new(Point.new(0, 3), Point.new(4, 8), "BLUE", false)
```

The conversion from the hash(es) `p1` and `p2` to their respective Ruby
objects is not straightforward at all. A couple of points to note:

* Depending on the value of `"type"` the decoder returns either a `Circle` or a
  `Rectangle`.
* The representation of the rectangle in `p2` differs from the one we use in
  our Ruby class `Rectangle` (point, width, height vs point, point).
* The `"color"` field is transmitted using lowercase, but we want to convert it
  to uppercase.
* `"status"` is either `"visible"` or `"invisible"`---on the Ruby side we want
  to set a visibility flag to either `true` or `false`.

## Building it

_Note: The design of this library is heavily inspired by libraries like
[Json.Decode](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/core/5.1.1/Json-Decode),
[aeson](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson-1.4.2.0) and
[parsec](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/parsec)._

Let's start with the most simple decoder: The
[identity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_function) decoder which
just returns its input.

Since a decoder is a partial function we can use a `lambda` to represent it
and take care of the partiality by using a result/either type [^either]. The
`Err` values represent failed decodings and include an error message and the
`Ok` values represent successful decodings.

```ruby
id_decoder = -> (input) { Ok(input) }
id_decoder["23"] # => "Ok(23)"
```

Composing different decoders will require us to define methods on a decoder,
so let's wrap that lambda in a class so we don't need to monkey patch `Proc`.

```ruby
class Decoder
  def initialize(&block)
    @f = block
  end

  def run(value)
    @f[value]
  end

  def self.id
    new do |input|
      Ok(input)
    end
  end
end

Decoder.id.run("23") # => "Ok(23)"
```

Alright, this is all the boilerplate we'll need. Now we're ready to tackle
the first real problem: Getting from a string to an integer.

### String to integer (`"42" -> 42`)

We'll use `Integer` for strict conversion from strings to integers. `to_i`
just returns `0` when giving invalid input. That's usually not what we want.

```ruby
integer = Decoder.new do |input|
  begin
    Ok(Integer(input))
  rescue TypeError, ArgumentError
    Err("'#{input.inspect}' is not an integer")
  end
end

integer.run("123") # => Ok(123)
```

The code should be pretty straighforward: On every input which is not
convertable to a number we return an error (`Integer(nil)` returns a
`TypeError`).

### Converting a string to uppercase (`"red"` -> `"RED"`)

Remember that the color name of a shape is passed in as lowercase, but our
backend needs it to be uppercase? At this point we could define another
custom decoder which takes a string and returns its uppercase variant. But
what happens if we have to decode in the opposite direction---from uppercase
to lowercase? Or change a number from 0-indexed to 1-indexed---by adding 1 to
the decoded value? Writing custom decoders for each of these seems like a lot
of unnecessary work.

All these use cases have one thing in common: We want to call a function on
the decoded value. So, let's add a way to do so to `Decoder`:

```ruby
class Decoder
  def fmap(&block)
    Decoder.new do |input|
      run(input).fmap(&block)
    end
  end
end
```

`fmap` first runs the input through the decoder and afterwards passes the
value into the provided block.
`Decoder#fmap` is very similar to `Array#map` in that it "maps" a function
over the element(s). However, I chose to not call it `map` [^fmap] to make it less
confusing when reading code which deals with decoders and arrays at the same
time.

We can now express our color decoder using `fmap`:

```ruby
color = Decoder.id.fmap { |output| output.upcase }
# or shorter
color = Decoder.id.fmap(&:upcase)

color.run("red") # => Ok("RED")
```

We're almost finished converting the values of `p1` or `p2`, the only thing
left is the `"status"` key and its possible values.

### Alternatives (`"visible"` -> `true` OR `"invisible"` -> `false`)

`"status"` can have two distinct values: `"visible"` and `"invisible"`. We want to map them to `true` and `false` respectively.
*Mapp*ing sounds like a job for our already defined `fmap`. So let's use it again.

```ruby
visibility = Decoder.id.map { |output| output == "visible" ? true : false }

visibility.run("visible") # => Ok(true)
visibility.run("invisible") # => Ok(false)
visibility.run("garbage") # => Ok(false)
visibility.run(2) # => Ok(false)
```

This works, but it doesn't read very well and for anything not `"visible"` or
`"invisible"` it will always return `false`. Silencing errors like that is
usually not a good idea. So, back to the drawing board.

Looking at the header of this chapter we have `OR` as our top-level operator
and _then_ do some kind of mapping. How would such an `a OR b` behave? It
would probably try to decode `a` first and if it succeeds return the decoded
value. Otherwise `OR` would try decoding `b` and return that.

Here's what `OR` would look like in code---using `|` instead of `||` because `||` can't be defined as a method [^or-method]:

```ruby
class Decoder
  def |(other)
    Decoder.new do |input|
      self.run(input) | other.run(input)
    end
  end
end

d = integer | Decoder.id
d.run("2") # => Ok(2)
d.run("a") # => Ok("a")
```

with `|` on `Result` being defined as:

```ruby
Ok(a)  | _ = Ok(a)
Err(a) | b = b
```

With `Decoder#|` defined we need a way to match on `"visible"` and
`"invisble"`. `Decoder.match("visible")` would look nice, so let's implement
that:

```ruby
class Decoder
  def self.match(constant)
    self.new do |s|
      if s == constant
        Ok(s)
      else
        Err("'#{s}' doesn't match '#{constant}'")
      end
    end
  end
end

Decoder.match("foo").run("foo") # => Ok(foo)
Decoder.match("foo").run("bar") # => Err('bar' doesn't match 'foo')
```

Combining `match`, `fmap` and `|` we can now express our mapping from `"status"` to boolean flags:


```ruby
visibility = Decoder.match("visible").fmap { |_| true } |
             Decoder.match("invisible").fmap { |_| false }

visibility.run("visible") # => Ok(true)
visibility.run("invisible") # => Err(false)
visibility.run("foo") # => Err('foo' doesn't match 'invisible')
```

Using `fmap` and ignoring the parameter still feels a bit clunky. We can get
rid of that by using `Decoder#>` which mirrors Haskell's
[`$>`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.12.0.0/docs/Data-Functor.html#v:-36--62-):

```ruby
class Decoder
  def >(constant)
    fmap { |_| constant }
  end
end

visibility = (Decoder.match("visible") > true) |
             (Decoder.match("invisible") > false)
```

### Extracting values from hash maps (`{"center" => 23}` -> `23`)

So far we can only decode simple values, but not larger structures like `Hash` or `Array`. We have a couple of ways to decode hash maps. Typically this is done through a DSL similar to the following:

```ruby
decode_hash(
  foo: integer,
  bar: visibility
)
```

However, this is too restrictive for our use case since we're coupling the
structure of the input hash map to the structure of the output hash map. This
would leave us with some additional data wrangling which we'd like to avoid.
So, what's the alternative? Both Haskell's
[`aeson`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson-1.4.2.0/docs/Data-Aeson.html#v:.:)
and Elm's
[`Json.Decode`](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/core/5.1.1/Json-Decode#field)
define functions which (given a key name) extract just a single value from a
hash map. So, we try to do the same:

```ruby
class Decoder
  def self.from_key(key, value_decoder)
    self.new do |hash|
      next Err("'#{hash}' doesn't contain key '#{key}'") unless hash.has_key?(key)

      decoder.run(hash.fetch(key))
    end
  end
end

Decoder.from_key("foo", integer).run({"foo" => "2"}) # => Ok(2)
Decoder.from_key("foo", integer).run({"bar" => "2"}) # => Err()
```

A quick note on symbols vs strings as map keys: [^symbol-vs-string]

So far so good. We can now try to decode a `Point` (remember, it was
represented as `{"x" => "3", "y" => "4"}`):

```ruby
x = Decoder.from_key("x", integer)
y = Decoder.from_key("y", integer)

point = Point.new # ???
```

Well, we're stuck. We currently have no way to combine two decoders into one.
All we have right now is `fmap` which takes one decoder and returns a new
one. We need some kind of merge to get from `x`, `y` to `point`, though.

So, what if we take the idea of mapping over a decoder and extend it to two
decoders?

```ruby
class Decoder
  def self.map2(a, b)
    self.new do |input|
      a.run(input).then do |result1|
        b.run(input).then do |result2|
          Ok(yield result1, result2)
        end
      end
    end
  end
end

point = Decoder.map2(x, y) { |x, y| Point.new(x, y) }

point.run({"x" => "3", "y" => "4"}) # => Ok(Point(3, 4))
```

At this point (ha!) we have all ingredients for decoding a `Circle` and a `Rectangle`:

```ruby
circle =
  Decoder.map_n(
    Decoder.from_key("center", point),
    Decoder.from_key("radius", integer),
    Decoder.from_key("color", color),
    Decoder.from_key("status", visibility)
  ) do |center, radius, color, visibility|
    Circle.new(center, radius, color, visibility)
  end

rectangle =
  Decoder.map_n(
    Decoder.from_key("topLeft", point),
    Decoder.from_key("width", integer),
    Decoder.from_key("height", integer),
    Decoder.from_key("color", color),
    Decoder.from_key("status", visibility)
  ) do |top_left, width, height, color, visible|
    Rectangle.new(top_left, Point.new(top_left.x + width, top_left.y + height), color, visible)
  end
```

_`Decoder.map_n` is just a natural extension of `map2`, [the code](https://github.com/timhabermaas/timhabermaas.github.io/blob/develop/code/decoder.rb#L140) is left as an exercise for the reader._


### Making decisions

TODO

### Bonus functions

* `Decoder.at :: Int -> Decoder a -> Decoder a`
* `Decoder.from_key? :: Key -> Decoder a -> Decoder a`

## Conclusion

TODO

*


<!--
---

When looking at the [running example](#running-example) the most common use-case
seems to be to coerce a string to an integer. So, let's start with that.

### The boilerplate


#### A note on error handling for coercers

Generally a coercer is a [partial
function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_function), meaning for some
inputs there are no outputs---`"2019-13-51"` is not a valid date for example. In
order to encode this we generally have three options: (a) raise an exception,
(b) return `nil` or (c) use a [result
type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Result_type). (b) is not an option at all,
because it will make differentiating between a coerced `nil` and an error
impossible (think JSON's `null`). We'll use (c) since this is the functional way
of doing things and result types compose nicer than exceptions. This means our
coercers will either return `Success` or `Error` [^either].

_Outline:_

* Explain common use-cases
* What does already exist(?)
* What is meant by a decoder?
  * takes a primitive structure and decodes it to a more rich one.
* Design goals/inspiration by Elm's decoder/parsec

fo

* Which methods return these "primitive" structures?
  * `JSON.parse`
  * `params` in Rails (and  oseveral other web libraries)
  * `CSV.parse`

* What is meant by a decoder?
* The source input is some combination of `Hash`map, `Array` and `String`. JSON also has Numbers and Booleans, but these only make writing a decoder easier.
* We're very lucky in Ruby to have all these methods to return roughly the same structure, so we could write on generic library to handle all these use cases.

Except for `dry-schema` all of these take a DSL and configuration heavy
approach. Inherently there's nothing wrong with this, but k



Forms submitted through HTTP are stringly typed, meaning integers, booleans,
dates, etc. are all transmitted as strings. At some point we want to convert these
string values to the proper types. In Rails this is usually done at the database level:
Instantiating a new ActiveRecord object auto-magically coerces the values to
the correct types according to the database schema. This works for the most
basic use cases, but for anything larger than a toy app we want to have a
general solution at the HTTP boundary (called "controller" in Rails). Think
search or report query forms.

There exist several libraries which deal with this problem. For example:

* [dry-types](https://github.com/dry-rb/dry-types)/[dry-validation](https://github.com/dry-rb/dry-validation)
* [safe_type](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/safe_type)
* [coercible](https://github.com/solnic/coercible)

However, a DSL and configuration heavy approach is common among them. This leads
to some restrictions. For example, it is not possible to change the structure of
a hash map without resorting to manual data manipulation after coercion.

In this post we want to tackle the same problem (coercing arbitrary
`params` hash maps to arbitrary Ruby objects [^also-json]) in a more functional, flexible and
extensible way.

_Disclaimer: Most of the ideas presented here are inspired by a mixture of the Haskell
and Elm libraries [parsec](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/parsec),
[Json.Encode](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/core/5.1.1/Json-Encode)
and
[aeson](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson-1.4.1.0/docs/Data-Aeson.html)._

## What is type coercion?

While _type coercion_ is often used in the context of programming languages and
implicit type conversions (e.g. what Ruby does when interpreting `1.5 + 1`)
[^wikiconversion], I'm using the term _coercer_ to describe a function which converts any type `a`
to any type `b`. For example `-> (x) { x == "true" }` would be a coercer
converting a `String` to a `Boolean`.




## Design Goals

* _Composibility_: Coercers should be composable from smaller parts, meaning
  we can reuse a coercer from `String` to `Date` to build a coercer from
  `Array of String` to `Array of Date`.
* _Flexibility_: It should be easy to express more complex coercions like
  getting from the Hash `{"x" => "2", "y" => "3"}` to the instance `Point.new(2,
  3)`. Many existing coercion libraries can't express these conversions since
  their DSLs force a 1-to-1 relationship between source hash map and target hash
  map onto the user.
* _Extensibility_: It should be easy for users of the library to define their
  own coercing rules---preferably by simply combining the provided building
  blocks.



TODO: Hier bin ich.

### Converting a string to an integer (`"42" -> 42`)



Looking at the hash maps in [Running example](#running-example) we foremost need
a way to convert a `String` to an `Integer`. So, let's define a function to do
so:

```ruby
integer = -> (s) {
  Integer(s)
}

integer["2"] # => 2
integer["a"] # => ArgumentError: invalid value for Integer(): "a"
integer[nil] # => TypeError: can't convert nil into Integer
```

With both points addressed we end up with the following class:

```ruby
class Coercer
  def initialize(&block)
    @f = block
  end

  def run(value)
    @f[value]
  end

  def self.integer
    self.new do |s|
      begin
        Success.new(Integer(s))
      rescue TypeError, ArgumentError
        Error.new("'#{s}' is not an integer")
      end
    end
  end
end

Coercer.integer.run("2") # => #<Success:0x00007fde11063050 @x=2>
Coercer.integer.run("a") # => #<Error:0x00007fde1200fd78 @e="'a' is not an integer">
```

A coercion is a partial function from some value (e.g. `"2018-10-02"`) to some
other value (e.g. `Date.new(2018, 10, 2)`). The function is partial because a
coercion doesn't necessarily succeed. For example: `"2018-13-34"` doesn't
represent a valid date, so it can't be coerced into `Date`.

Therefore we can represent a coercion as a `lambda` returning either an object
of class `Success` or an error represented by `Error`. Encoding the error case
using `nil` wouldn't work because we couldn't tell an error and a successful
coercion resulting in `nil` apart (e.g. JSON's `null` would be represented as
`nil`).

* They are functions from some type (e.g. `String`) to some other type (e.g.
  `Date`).
* A type coercion might either fail or succeed



Let's start

### Converting a String to an Integer (`"42" -> 42`)

This one's easy:

```ruby
integer = -> (s) {
  begin
    Success.new(Integer(s))
  rescue TypeError, ArgumentError
    Error.new("'#{s}' is not an integer")
  end
}

integer["42"] # => 42
```

Once we've wrapped everything in a class and took care of the sad path
[^no-to-i]. After we've wrapped the

function in a lambda and in a class `Coercer`---we might

```ruby
  43 + 2
```

### Converting a value (`"red" -> "RED"`)

### Getting a value out of a hash map (`{"x" => "42"} -> 42`)

### Alternatives (`||` or `|`)

TODO: is `||` left/right associative?

```ruby

```

-->


[^wikiconversion]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_conversion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_conversion)
[^success-definition]: TODO: See github-link for possible implementation of `Success` and
`Error`.
[^no-to-i]: I choose `Integer` instead of `to_i` since `to_i` returns `0` if it
can't find a number in the string: `"a".to_i # => 0`
[^fmap]: fmap historic mistake;
[^either]: See Rust's [`std::result](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/) for
an implementation. TODO: Check that we're actually using the same implementation
[^deadline]: Yes, this is a real-world example from integrating with an external system. Shit's gonna hit the fan in ~981 years.
[^type-system]: One might argue that a dynamically typed language like Ruby
has less use for explicit decoders because of duck typing. But I'd argue
otherwise: It's especially important to get the type conversion right,
because there's no assistance from a type system in case you mess up.
[^fmap]: The name comes from the `Functor` typeclass in Haskell:
  [https://wiki.haskell.org/Functor](https://wiki.haskell.org/Functor). They avoided calling it `map` because `map`
  leads to better error message for beginners
  ([source](https://wiki.haskell.org/Typeclassopedia#Instances)).
[^or-method]: [http://phrogz.net/ProgrammingRuby/language.html#operatorexpressions](http://phrogz.net/ProgrammingRuby/language.html#operatorexpressions)
[^symbol-vs-string]: In case you need to decode a hash map which uses either symbols or strings as keys and you don't know which it is, you simply could define a new decoder which takes care of both:
    ```ruby
    def from_key_indifferent(sym_or_string, decoder)
      from_key(sym_or_string.to_s, decoder) || from_key(sym_or_string.to_sym, decoder)
    end
    ```
[^existing-libraries]:
    * [safe_type](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/safe_type)
    * [dry-types](https://github.com/dry-rb/dry-types) / [dry-validation](https://github.com/dry-rb/dry-validation)
    * [coercible](https://github.com/solnic/coercible)
